Statutory Guidance for Police on
Unauthorised Encampments
a summary of available powers
June 2022
Statutory Guidance for Police on
Unauthorised Encampments
a summary of available powers
Presented to Parliament pursuant to section 85 of the Police,
Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022
June 2022
© Crown copyright 2022
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/opengovernment-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National
Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain
permission from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/official-documents
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at
public.enquiries@homeoffice.gov.uk.
ISBN 978-1-5286-3532-5
E02764577 06/22
Printed on paper containing 40% recycled fibre content minimum
Printed in the UK by HH Associates Ltd. on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s
Stationery Office
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
Contents
Summary 1
About this guidance 1
What has been introduced in the 2022 Act? 2
What has changed for the existing powers? 2
The new criminal offence 3
Existing and strengthened powers to remove trespassers on land 7
Application of the guidance 11
Failing to leave 11
What is a reasonable excuse? 12
Welfare issues 12
Equalities 12
Likely to cause 13
Intention to reside 13
Preventing the return of an unauthorised encampment 15
Following up on enforcement action 15
Additional Sources of Information 16
Glossary of terms 17
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
1
Summary
About this guidance
This statutory guidance sets out the suite of powers available for police to respond to
unauthorised encampments and to tackle a range of harms proportionately. It includes the
powers that were already available to police in the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act
1994 (CJPOA) and new powers introduced by the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts
Act 2022 (“the 2022 Act”). The new powers deliver on the Government’s manifesto
commitment to tackle unauthorised encampments and the harms caused by trespassers
refusing to leave land and causing harm to communities and landowners.
The Secretary of State must issue this guidance under s62F of the CJPOA relating to the
exercise by the police of their powers under s60C to s62E of the CJPOA and regulations
made under s67. The powers include a new offence of residing on land without consent in
or with a vehicle with other conditions introduced by the 2022 Act. This guidance is
intended to help police forces exercise the powers available to them in the CJPOA,
including new or amended provisions introduced by the 2022 Act.
Under s67 of the CJPOA, any vehicles which have been seized and removed by police
under s62(1), s62C(3), or s64(4) may be retained in accordance with regulations made by
the Secretary of State. The Police (Retention and Disposal of Motor Vehicles) Regulations
1995 are made under this section.
All powers referred to in the guidance have been designed to apply to anyone residing on
land without consent and refusing to leave who causes harm, meeting the conditions for
enforcement action, regardless of their race or ethnicity. The Government expects the
police to take action where appropriate against anyone who breaks the law. Police should
also continue to consider their obligations under human rights legislation, their Public
Sector Equality Duty and wider equalities legislation.
It remains the case that the response to unauthorised encampments and to individuals
who do not leave land when asked to do so, causing harm in the conditions set out,
requires a locally driven multi-agency response, led by local authorities and supported by
police. Operational advice for officers dealing with unauthorised encampments produced
by the National Police Chiefs Council (NPCC) will be updated in accordance with changes
in the 2022 Act. There is also separate guidance for dealing with unauthorised
encampments which is primarily aimed at local authorities but is also intended to be helpful
to owners or occupiers of land and others affected by unauthorised encampments or
individuals who refuse to leave land and cause harm in the conditions described. The
decision on which police powers are used remains at the discretion of the police officer
attending a particular incident who must, when exercising that discretion, have regard to
this guidance under s62F of the CJPOA.
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
2
The unauthorised encampments provisions are not targeted at rough sleepers, nor at
those looking to access the countryside for leisure, such as ramblers and other groups.
The provisions will apply to anyone who refuses to leave land and causes harm, meeting
the conditions of the powers within this guidance.
In the above context this guidance aims to:
• set out all the new powers in the 2022 Act and existing powers in the CJPOA (s60C
to 62E and regulations made under s67) which are available to police to tackle
unauthorised encampments.
• clarify the meaning of key terms within the 2022 Act.
• help the police decide on proportionate action.
The scope of this guidance does not cover incidents whereby individuals purchase land
and occupy it, with or without planning permission. Action against an unauthorised
development will continue to be led by the local planning authority.
What has been introduced in the 2022 Act?
s60C to s60E of the CJPOA set out the criminal offence relating to residing on land without
consent, in or with a vehicle, and associated seizure and forfeiture powers. Some existing
powers in the CJPOA have also been amended to strengthen the provisions.
What has changed for the existing powers?
Existing powers, which in some cases have been strengthened by the 2022 Act, are set
out in s61 to s62E of the CJPOA. Regulations made under s67 relate to vehicles seized
under s62(1) or s62C(3).
The existing provisions, as strengthened, are designed to ensure that lower levels of harm
or disruption committed by those who refuse to leave land, than those for the new offence,
can be met with proportionate enforcement action. Where possible, police should liaise
with local authorities when assessing each individual case and rely on the evidence in
each to determine the appropriate powers to use.
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
3
The new criminal offence
The new criminal offence under s60C to s60E of the CJPOA is as follows:
Offence relating to residing on land without consent in or with a vehicle, as
introduced by the 2022 Act
Primary
conditions of
the criminal
offences60C(1)
Offence relating to residing on land without consent in or with a
vehicle applies where:
a) a person is aged 18 or over;
b) a person is residing, or intending to reside, on land without
the consent of the occupier of the land;
c) a person has or intends to have at least one vehicle with
them on the land;
d) one or more conditions in subsection 60C(4) are met; and
e) a request is made to the person to leave and/or remove
their property by the occupier, a representative of the
occupier or a constable.
This offence was created by the 2022 Act.
Further
conditions of
the criminal
offence - s60C
(2)
A criminal offence is committed when a person meets all the
conditions in s60C (1) and also meets one of the following:
a) a person fails to comply with the request to leave as soon
as reasonably practicable; or
b) a person re-enters or enters the land with an intention of
residing there without consent and has, or intends to have
a vehicle with them, within 12 months of the request being
made.
Specific
conditions
related to
harm - s60C
(4)
A person will commit this offence if they have caused, or are likely
to cause, significant damage, disruption, or distress and have met
the other conditions in s60C(1) and (2).
A constable must consider if the person has caused or is likely to
cause significant damage, disruption or distress. What could
constitute significant damage, disruption and distress can be
found under the heading ‘significant’ below.
Under s60C(4) a person can commit the offence if they are not
yet physically on the land and if they are likely to cause significant
damage, disruption or distress. Further detail can be found in the
‘likely to cause’ subsection further down this guidance.
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
4
If a person commits significant damage, disruption or distress and
then leaves further to the request from the occupier/their
representative/a constable, the s60C offence will not apply unless
they return to the land within the prohibited period of 12 months.
However, other offences relating to damage could have been
committed and options should be explored where appropriate.
Accompanying
power to seize
and retain
vehicles/other
property -
s60D
Police will be able to exercise powers of arrest and seizure in
relation to the offence. The power of seizure includes power to
seize a vehicle but is not limited to this.
If a constable reasonably suspects that an offence has been
committed under s60C, the constable may seize and remove any
relevant property that appears to the constable:
a) to belong to the person suspected of committing the
offence;
b) to be in the person’s possession; or
c) to be under the person’s control
s60D(2)(a) provides that a vehicle can be seized ‘wherever
located’ if the constable suspects the person had or intended to
have this with them in commission of the offence under s60C. For
‘other property’ to be seized it must be on the land which was
subject to the request to leave, as provided by s60D(2)(b).
s60D(10) enables a person to retrieve property where they satisfy
the chief officer that the property belongs to the person at that
time and belonged to them at the time of the suspected offence
under s60C.
s60D(11) prevents another person retrieving the seized vehicle
where the chief officer of police reasonably believes that the
vehicle was in the possession or control of the offender with that
person’s consent at the time of the offence.
The relevant chief officer of police may retain any property that
has been seized under subsection (1) until the end of the period
of three months beginning with the day of the seizure or, if
criminal proceedings are commenced, until the conclusion of
those proceedings.
If a decision is made not to charge the person, the property must
be returned to the person believed to be the owner as soon as
practicable.
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
5
If a chief officer of police cannot after reasonable inquiry identify
the vehicle owner:
(a) the chief officer must apply to a magistrates’ court for
directions, and (b) the court must make an order about the
treatment of the property.
Accompanying
power for
forfeiture -
s60E
If a person is convicted of the offence under s60C, the court may
order any vehicle/other property that has been seized under s60D
and retained by the police to be forfeited.
Penalties The maximum penalty for the offence will be three months’
imprisonment or a fine not exceeding level 4 (£2,500) on the
standard scale, or both.
Reasonable
excuse
A person will not commit the offence if they can show they have a
reasonable excuse for failing to comply with a request to leave as
soon as reasonably practicable and remove their property or,
after receiving the request, entering (or re-entering) the land with
the intention of residing there without consent within 12 months of
the request.
“Significant” The factual circumstances of each case will determine whether a
‘significant’ level of damage, disruption or distress has been
caused or is likely to be caused and this will be for police and
courts to assess.
The assessment of this will depend on the individual facts of each
case; it is important to remember that one of significant damage,
disruption or distress must be caused or likely to be caused by
the person’s conduct or residence on the land. Such harms,
disruption or distress could include, but are not limited to:
a) local communities being prevented from accessing or
using facilities, such as school sports fields, parks and car
parks.
b) property on the land is damaged or the land itself is
damaged, including agricultural land.
c) forcing entry to the land has caused damage to fixtures or
fittings.
d) the environment is damaged, including excessive littering,
fly tipping, excessive noise and smells from waste or
smoke due to bonfires.
e) interference with water, energy or fuel supplies.
f) impacting the ability of workers or customers to access
shopping centres, businesses, or agricultural land, if this
results in the loss of lawful use of the land.
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
6
g) distress caused by offensive conduct such as verbal abuse
and threatening behaviour. This may include a level of
distress which changes behaviour.
These are some of the factors that the police could consider when
assessing whether damage, disruption or distress is significant. If
the police deem the harms to not be significant, then the offence
under s60C would not apply. However, powers under s61 and
s62A of the CJPOA 1994 could still be used, providing the
conditions are met.
Some of the factors for police to consider when considering the
appropriate enforcement response could also include:
How are the occupiers of the land and users of the land
affected? If local sports teams cannot use the facilities due to
damage caused by people residing or intending to reside on land,
or because the land is obstructed, then this could be deemed
significant damage or disruption. The size and scale of the land
occupied/damage caused is relevant when considering how an
occupier and land users are affected.
How frequently is the land used? People residing or intending
to reside on an industrial estate or shopping centre car park could
significantly disrupt people’s ability to go about their lawful
business and impact trade. However, if the unauthorised
encampment is in the corner of a local field or park then it might
not be causing significant disruption.
How is the environment being damaged? A small amount of
rubbish may not be judged by the courts to constitute significant
damage to the land. However, excessive smells, noise, bonfires,
and larger amounts of rubbish may be considered significant by
police/courts.
The above is not, and should not be considered, an exhaustive
list. There may be scenarios listed above which a court could
deem to meet the threshold of “significant” in certain
circumstances. Police will be expected to deal with each case on
its own merits and determine through gathering evidence whether
the threshold of significant has been met. If it has not been met,
then the other CJPOA powers may be used.
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
7
Existing and strengthened powers to
remove trespassers on land
Existing powers to remove trespassers on land as introduced in the CJPOA
and amended by the 2022 Act
Power to
remove
trespassers
with a
common
purpose of
residing on
land
In cases where no significant harms have been committed by
trespassers, police may decide to take other enforcement action
using s61 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994,
providing the conditions for this are met.
s61 gives police the powers to direct trespassers on land who
have the common purpose of residing there for any period.
This power applies where a senior officer reasonably believes
that two or more people are trespassing on land with the purpose
of residing there, that the occupier has taken reasonable steps to
ask them to leave, and any of the following have occurred:
a) any of the trespassers has caused damage, disruption, or
distress or
b) the trespassers have between them six or more vehicles
on the land.
The conditions that can be caught by the power to direct
under 61(1) (a) have been broadened under the 2022 Act.
These replicate the damage, disruption and distress included in
the new offence, but do not need to be ‘significant’.
Failure to comply with the direction, by failing to leave the land as
soon as reasonably practicable and without reasonable excuse, is
an offence.
Similarly, it is an offence for a trespasser who has left the land in
compliance with a direction to re-enter it as a trespasser within 12
months of the direction being given. The period of prohibited
return has been extended from 3 months to 12 months under
the 2022 Act. If breached, without reasonable excuse, police will
be able to exercise powers of arrest and seizure.
If a constable reasonably suspects a person has failed to remove
their vehicle as directed, without reasonable excuse, or entered
the land as a trespasser within 12 months of the direction to leave
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
8
being given, a constable may seize and remove that vehicle
under s62 of the CJPOA.
As introduced by the 2022 Act, a direction under s61 can be
issued to trespassers on land that forms part of a highway
where the other conditions are met.
If there are no significant harms committed, then s61 powers can
be used by police and local authorities can use other existing
powers available to them.
Police Powers
to direct
trespassers to
an alternative
site
Police have powers under s62A of the CJPOA to direct
trespassers to leave land and remove any vehicle and property
from the land where there is a suitable pitch available on a
caravan site elsewhere in the local authority area, provided there
is at least one trespasser with the purpose of residing, one
vehicle present on the land and an occupier or person acting on
their behalf has asked the police to remove the trespassers.
Failure to comply with the direction, by failing to leave the land as
soon as reasonably practicable, without reasonable excuse, is an
offence under s62B. Similarly, a person is committing an offence
if they enter any land in the area of the relevant local authority as
a trespasser with the intention of residing there within 12 months
of the direction being given.
In accordance with s62C, if a direction issued under s62A(1) is
breached, without reasonable excuse, police will be able to
exercise powers of arrest and seizure.
Police
(Retention and
Disposal of
Vehicles)
Regulations
1995/723
Under s67 of the CJPOA, any vehicles which have been seized
and removed by police under s62(1), 62C(3), or 64(4) may be
retained in accordance with regulations made by the Secretary of
State. The Police (Retention and Disposal of Vehicles)
Regulations 1995/723 are made under this section.
These regulations provide for the retention, safe keeping,
disposal and destruction, by the police or persons authorised by
the chief officer of the relevant police force, of vehicles seized
under those powers.
Under Regulation 4, the authority having custody of the vehicle is
obliged to take steps to give a notice to the person from whom the
vehicle was seized requiring them to claim the vehicle within 21
days of the day on which notice is given. The notice must state
that unless the vehicle is claimed on or before that date the
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
9
authority intend to destroy or dispose of it. The notice must also
indicate that charges may be payable by that person and that the
vehicle may be retained until these charges are paid.
The level of the charges is prescribed in Regulation 9.
Where the authority is unable to serve a notice on the owner of
the vehicle, or that person fails to remove the vehicle from their
custody, the authority may dispose of or destroy the vehicle in
accordance with Regulation 6.
Regulation 6(5)(a) provides, subject to Regulations 6(5)(b) or (c),
that the vehicle must not be disposed of/destroyed before 3
months from the date of seizure
Regulation 8 provides that where a vehicle is sold, the net
proceeds of sale are payable to the owner of a vehicle, if, within
one year of the sale, they satisfy the authority that they were the
owner of the vehicle.
Compensation
for victims of
an offence
Where an offender (which includes an adult or an organisation) is
convicted of an offence, s133 and s134 of the Sentencing Act
2020 give the criminal courts in England and Wales the power to
impose a compensation order. A compensation order requires the
offender to pay compensation for any personal injury, loss or
damage resulting from the offence. The court must give reasons if
it decides not to make an order where one is available.
A compensation order may be imposed as a sentence in its own
right, or as an ancillary order alongside another sentence such as
a fine or a community order.
s135 of the Sentencing Act 2020 provides that a compensation
order must specify the amount to be paid under it, and that this
must be an amount which the court considers appropriate having
regard to any evidence, including any representations made by
the offender or prosecutor. There is no statutory limit on the
amount of compensation that may be imposed for an offender
aged 18 or over. However, in determining whether to make a
compensation order, and in determining the amount to be paid
under such an order, the court must take into account the
offender’s means.
s137(4) of the Sentencing Act 2020 makes clear that
compensation can be awarded in relation to certain costs
connected to certain offences relating to waste, and these would
constitute loss or damage for the purposes of making a
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
10
compensation order. A compensation order may be made in
favour of a local authority.
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
11
Application of the guidance
When deciding on the appropriate enforcement action to take in relation to the new offence
and existing CJPOA enforcement powers, police should continue to consider all the facts
of each case. NPCC operational advice for tackling unauthorised encampments and
individual police force guidance will provide operational best practices and can be used
alongside this statutory guidance.
The ‘likely to cause’ damage, disruption or distress provision applies to the offence and not
the existing s61 or s62 provisions.
Possible considerations for the police include (but are not limited to) the levels of the
following harms caused and, for the new offence only, the levels of harm a person is ‘likely
to cause’:
(a) damage that the person has caused.
(b) interference that a person has caused to local amenities such as gas and electric
supplies through their presence, likely presence or conduct on the land.
(c) harm that the person has caused to the local environment, such as excessive noise
or smells through their presence, likely presence or conduct on the land.
(d) interference with people’s ability to access or use the land through the person’s
presence, likely presence or conduct on the land.
(e) potential interference with the peaceful enjoyment of neighbouring property.
(f) harm to good community relations.
(g) distress caused by abusive behaviour and/or language or threatening, abusive or
insulting writing or signs.
(h) risks of public disorder or public safety.
The s60C offence applies only to those individuals who commit or are likely to commit
significant damage, disruption or distress.
Failing to leave
A s61 direction to leave can be made against all trespassers even if the damage,
disruption, or distress is caused by only one member of the encampment, providing there
are two or more trespassers on the land with the purpose of residing. A direction to leave
can also be made against all trespassers in the event no damage, disruption or distress is
caused but there are six or more vehicles on that land. s61 relies upon reasonable steps
being taken by, or on behalf of, the occupier to ask trespassers to leave in every case
before police powers can be used.
Under s61, if the person fails to comply with the request to leave as soon as practicable
(which will depend on the facts of the case), or they return as a trespasser to the location
within 12 months of the direction, without reasonable excuse, they are committing a s61
offence.
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
12
What is a reasonable excuse?
A person can show they have a reasonable excuse for failing to leave the land as soon as
reasonably practicable or for entering again within the prohibited period.
Police will be expected to consider what constitutes a reasonable excuse depending on
the factual circumstances of each case.
The following examples may be unlikely to be considered reasonable excuses:
a) the vehicle has broken down; the legislation states a vehicle is any vehicle, whether
or not it is in a fit state for use on roads and includes any chassis or body, with or
without wheels;
b) the attendance of events;
c) the attendance of an appointment, unless for medical reasons to which the police
and courts deem a reasonable excuse for residing on land without permission
applies.
Welfare issues
Police should ensure that, in accordance with their wider equalities and human rights
obligations, proper welfare enquiries are carried out to determine whether there are
pressing needs presented by those on unauthorised encampments and that, where
necessary, the appropriate agencies (including Local Authorities) are involved as soon as
possible.
Each case should be dealt with on its own merits by police. This includes considering the
potential impact issuing a direction to leave, arresting a person, or seizing a vehicle may
have on the families involved and on the vulnerable, before taking an enforcement
decision.
If necessary, enforcement action against those on the unauthorised encampment could be
delayed while urgent welfare needs are addressed.
The police have the powers to take action where significant harms have been caused. It is
for the police to decide on proportionate enforcement action based on the circumstances
and evidence of each case.
Equalities
The Equality Act 2010 makes it unlawful to treat someone less favourably than others
because of their protected characteristic, including race (which includes a person’s ethnic
or national origins and nationality).
The Public Sector Equality Duty, under s149 of the Equality Act 2010, applies to the police
(as a public authority) and places a duty on the police to have due regard to the need to
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
13
eliminate discrimination, promote equality of opportunity and foster good relations between
persons of different racial groups.
Gypsy, Roma, and Irish Travellers, each a distinct racial group, are recognised as sharing
a protected characteristic under the Equality Act 2010. Following a nomadic lifestyle is
lawful. The Gypsy, Roma, Traveller community has a unique way of life and their way of
life may need to be accommodated differently to other communities or wider society.
Members of the Gypsy, Roma, Traveller community, like all members of the public, have a
right to respect for private and family life under Article 8 of the Human Rights Act 1998.
The European Court has recognised that a nomadic way of life is central to the Gypsy and
Traveller identity.
However, the police, alongside other public bodies, should not gold-plate human rights and
equalities legislation. The police have been given strong powers to deal with unauthorised
encampments and when deciding on what action to take, they should consider the harms
caused by the unauthorised encampment (including those listed on page 5 and 6) and that
an individual may be deprived of their property where this is provided for by law and where
there is public interest justification for doing so.
Human rights legislation does not prevent action to protect local amenities and the local
environment; to maintain public order and safety; and to protect public health.
The necessary balancing of interests and rights of both travellers and settled residents
reflects the position regarding qualified rights in the Human Rights Act 1998/European
Convention on Human Rights (“ECHR”) and the need to maintain good community
relations under the Equality Act 2010.
Likely to cause
Relating to the new offence under s60C only, a person will commit an offence if they have
caused, or are likely to cause, significant damage, disruption, or distress while residing or
with an intention to reside. This enables the police to prevent further repeated significant
harms, rather than waiting until damage has taken place again, at another or the same
location before taking action. This is particularly useful where those who cause damage,
leave and move to another piece of land a short distance away or return, without the
consent of the occupier.
As is the case for other criminal offences, the police will need to collect evidence to form
reasonable grounds to suspect a person has committed the offence and the offence will
have been committed only where the specific conditions have been met.
Intention to reside
As for ‘likely to cause’, the police will need to assess each case and consider whether
there is an intention to reside. An example could be where a person is not yet physically
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
14
on the land but is in a vehicle just outside of the land and has already placed several of
their belongings on the land, thus possibly indicating an intention to reside.
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
15
Preventing the return of an unauthorised
encampment
Following up on enforcement action
Where a trespasser or unauthorised encampment returns in the conditions specified and
the police have used their powers under the CJPOA as amended by the 2022 Act to
remove them, police should consider pursuing further enforcement action.
Circumstances where the police should consider further enforcement action are:
• s60C offence - when a person returns with an intention to reside in or with a vehicle
within 12 months of being directed to leave, without a reasonable excuse.
• s61 offence – when a person having left the land after being issued a direction to
leave, again enters the land as a trespasser within the period of 12 months without
a reasonable excuse.
Police should have systems in place to record data so they can know whether a trespasser
or encampment is returning to the same location or moving to another location to commit
(or in some cases likely to commit) an offence in order to make best use of their
enforcement powers.
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
16
Additional Sources of Information
Police may also wish to refer to the following guidance documents and resources:
Dealing with illegal and unauthorised encampments - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk)
The Police (Retention and Disposal of Motor Vehicles) Regulations 1995 for powers of
seizure
NPCC operational advice
Dealing with unauthorised encampments
17
Glossary of terms
Term Definition
Highway This can be interpreted broadly. In London Borough of Southwark
and Another v. Transport for London [2018] UKSC 63, the Supreme
Court considered a highway to be “a way over which the public have
rights of passage, whether on foot, or horseback or in (or on)
vehicles”.
Human Rights Act
1998
An Act passed in 1998, and brought into force in October 2000,
which requires all public authorities to act in compliance with the
rights and obligations set out in the Act.
Land Does not include buildings other than— (a) agricultural buildings
within the meaning of paragraphs 3 to 8 of Schedule 5 to the Local
Government Finance Act 1988, or (b) scheduled monuments within
the meaning of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas
Act 1979.
Proportionality The concept that enforcement action should go no further than
necessary to prevent or tackle the harm that has been or is likely to
be committed and that a fair balance should be struck between the
rights of the individual and the interests of the community.
Occupier The person entitled to possession of the land by virtue of an estate
or interest held by the person, including a person who rents the
land.
Relevant property 1) a vehicle which the police suspect the person had or intended to
have with them for the purposes of the offence under s60C or
2) any other property on the land which was subject to the request
to leave.
Vehicle Vehicle includes any vehicle, whether or not it is in a fit state for use
on roads, and includes any chassis or body, with or without wheels.
Static caravans which are capable of being moved are included.
E02764577
978-1-5286-3532-5
