UK Parliament
House of Commons Library
Research Briefing
Gypsies and travellers: planning provisions
Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England
Published Wednesday, 08 May, 2024
Communities
Planning
Felicia Rankl
This briefing sets out how local authorities should plan for Gypsy and Traveller sites and what permissions Gypsy and Traveller sites need.
commonslibrary.parliament.uk

Summary
1 Planning for Gypsy and Traveller sites
2 How are Gypsies and Travellers defined in planning policy?
3 Permissions needed for Gypsy and Traveller sites
4 Number of caravan sites
5 Dealing with unauthorised developments and encampmentsGypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England

Image Credits
Traveller site2 AS by photogoodwin. Licensed by Adobe Stock, ID 7104486.

Disclaimer
The Commons Library does not intend the information in our research
publications and briefings to address the specific circumstances of any
particular individual. We have published it to support the work of MPs. You
should not rely upon it as legal or professional advice, or as a substitute for
it. We do not accept any liability whatsoever for any errors, omissions or
misstatements contained herein. You should consult a suitably qualified
professional if you require specific advice or information. Read our briefing
‘Legal help: where to go and how to pay’ for further information about
sources of legal advice and help. This information is provided subject to the
conditions of the Open Parliament Licence.
Sources and subscriptions for MPs and staff
We try to use sources in our research that everyone can access, but
sometimes only information that exists behind a paywall or via a subscription
is available. We provide access to many online subscriptions to MPs and
parliamentary staff, please contact hoclibraryonline@parliament.uk or visit
commonslibrary.parliament.uk/resources for more information.

Feedback
Every effort is made to ensure that the information contained in these publicly
available briefings is correct at the time of publication. Readers should be
aware however that briefings are not necessarily updated to reflect
subsequent changes.
If you have any comments on our briefings please email
papers@parliament.uk. Please note that authors are not always able to
engage in discussions with members of the public who express opinions
about the content of our research, although we will carefully consider and
correct any factual errors.
You can read our feedback and complaints policy and our editorial policy at
commonslibrary.parliament.uk. If you have general questions about the work
of the House of Commons email hcenquiries@parliament.uk.Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England

Contents
Summary 4
1 Planning for Gypsy and Traveller sites 6
1.1 Assessing and meeting the needs of Gypsies and Travellers 7
1.2 Changes to planning policy 9
2 How are Gypsies and Travellers defined in planning policy? 11
2.1 Changes to the definition over time 11
2.2 Legal challenge to definition 12
2.3 Subsequent change to definition 13
3 Permissions needed for Gypsy and Traveller sites 15
3.1 Planning permission 15
3.2 Gypsy and Traveller sites on green belt land 17
3.3 Caravan site licence 20
4 Number of caravan sites 21
5 Dealing with unauthorised developments and encampments 23
5.1 Unauthorised developments 23
5.2 Failure to obtain a site licence 25
5.3 Unauthorised encampments 25Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England

Summary
Planning is a devolved matter. This briefing focuses on England.
Planning for Gypsy and Traveller sites
The government’s planning policies for Gypsy and Traveller sites (areas where
Gypsies and Travellers can station caravans and mobile homes), are set out
in its planning policy for Traveller sites (first published in 2012 and updated in
2015 and December 2023). Local planning authorities must prepare their local
plans (in which they set out their policies for the development and land use in
their area) in line with the policy. The policy is also a ‘material consideration’
in planning decisions.
The policy states that each local planning authority should assess the need
for sites to accommodate Gypsies and Travellers in its area. If it identifies a
local need, a local planning authority should set targets for the number of
Gypsy and Traveller sites and identify land suitable for these sites.
If local planning authorities are unable to demonstrate a five-year supply of
specific, deliverable sites, the government states that they should grant
planning permission to sites that come forward unless the land is protected.
What permissions are needed for Gypsy and
Traveller sites?
Stationing of caravans or mobile homes on land may require planning
permission from the local planning authority. A local planning authority will
generally decide planning applications in line with their local plan and the
government’s planning policy for Traveller sites.
If a caravan site is run by a private company or organisation rather than the
local authority, it may also require a site licence from the local authority.
A local authority can attach conditions to planning permission or a caravan
site licence, for example, to limit the number of caravans allowed on a site or
to limit number of days caravans can be stationed on a site.Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England

Sites on green belt land
The government says that temporary and permanent Gypsy and Traveller
sites are considered “inappropriate development” on the green belt. It says
that only “very special circumstances” justify development on the green belt.
Number of caravan sites
Local authorities count the number of caravans on Gypsy and Traveller sites
in their area twice a year (in July and January). At the time of the most recent
count in July 2023, local authorities counted 25,220 caravans on Gypsy and
Traveller sites in England. This is a 21% increase compared with July 2013.
In July 2023, 26% of all caravans on Gypsy and Traveller sites were on public
sites, 60% were on authorised private sites and 14% were on unauthorised
sites. Of the caravans on unauthorised sites, most (83%) were on land owned
by Gypsies or Travellers, and 17% were unauthorised encampments on land
belonging to private landowners or public authorities.
How can local authorities deal with
unauthorised sites?
Failure to obtain planning permission where it is required is considered a
‘planning breach’. A local planning authority can take enforcement action
against unauthorised development at its discretion.
The government advises local planning authorities to “act proportionately” in
responding to planning breaches. However, it also advises them to “aim to
reduce the number of unauthorised developments”.
Separate to the powers of local authorities to deal with unauthorised
development, the police also have powers to deal with ‘unauthorised
encampments’. They can take action if people enter and occupy land
belonging to private landowners or local authorities without their permission.

Further reading
This briefing is part of the Library series on Gypsies and Travellers. It brings
together briefings on policy areas that relate to their experiences, including
inequalities and discrimination, accommodation, planning laws, the legality
of encampments, education and statistics on the characteristics of different
groups of Gypsies and Travellers.Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England

1 Planning for Gypsy and Traveller sites
The government’s planning policy for Traveller sites (first published in 2012,
last updated December 2023) sets out national planning policies for Gypsies
and Travellers.1 Local planning authorities (LPAs) must take the policy into
account in preparing their local plans. It is also a ‘material consideration’ in
planning decisions.2
In the policy, the government states that its “overarching aim” is to “ensure
fair and equal treatment” of Gypsies and Travellers and to facilitate their
“traditional and nomadic way of life [...] while respecting the interests of the
settled community”.3

Planning is a devolved matter, and this briefing focuses on England.
1 For the purposes of this planning policy, “Travellers” refers to both “Gypsies and Travellers”.
2 DLUHC and MHCLG, Planning policy for Traveller sites, last updated December 2023, para 3
3 DLUHC and MHCLG, Planning policy for Traveller sites, last updated December 2023
4 Traveller Movement, Gypsy Roma and Traveller History and Culture, undated [accessed 26 April
2024]; Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC), Inequalities experienced by Gypsy and
Traveller communities: A review (PDF), 2009
5 Women and Equalities Committee, Tackling inequalities faced by Gypsy, Roma and Traveller
communities (PDF), 5 April 2019, HC 360 2017-19
6 DLUHC and MHCLG, Planning policy for Traveller sites, last updated December 2023

1 Who are Gypsies and Travellers?
The term ‘Gypsies and Travellers’ encompasses a range of ethnic and cultural
groups, many of which practice nomadism (where people do not have a single
fixed accommodation but move from place to place) and/or have a nomadic
heritage. Some of the groups included in this label are Welsh Gypsies, Scottish
Gypsy/Travellers and Irish Travellers.4 For further information about Gypsies
and Travellers, see the Library series on Gypsies and Travellers.
A report by the House of Commons Women and Equalities Select Committee
highlights that “while some find the term “Gypsy” to be offensive, many [...]
were proud to associate themselves with this term”. It is therefore also used in
this briefing.5
The government’s planning policy says Gypsies and Travellers are “persons of
nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin”. The government uses the
term ‘Travellers’ to refer to Gypsies and Travellers.6Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England

1.1 Assessing and meeting the needs of Gypsies
and Travellers
There are no nationally set targets for the number of Gypsy and Traveller sites
that an LPA must provide. Instead, LPAs should assess and meet the needs of
Gypsies and Travellers in their area in line with the government’s planning
policy for Traveller sites.7
The policy says that LPAs should assess the accommodation needs of Gypsies
and Travellers in their local area, including the needs for both permanent and
temporary accommodation. It advises LPAs to engage with Gypsies and
Travellers as part of this assessment as well as their representative bodies
and local support groups.
Where LPAs identify a need for Gypsy and Traveller sites in their local area,
they should set pitch targets (which are targets for the number and size of
Gypsy and Traveller sites) in their local plans. Their local plans must also
identify land that can provide five years’ worth of accommodation. If an LPA
cannot demonstrate an up-to-date supply of sites to deliver five years’ worth
of accommodation but did identify a local need, the government says that it
should consider granting planning permission to proposed sites unless they
are located in the green belt or protected in another way.8
The policy says that an LPA is not required to meet its need for Gypsy and
Traveller sites in full in “exceptional cases” if an LPA is “burdened by a largescale unauthorised site” and its area is “subject to strict and special planning
constraints”.9
Where LPAs do not identify a need for Gypsy and Traveller sites in their local
area, the policy advises LPAs to nevertheless set out “criteria-based policies”
in their local plan. These policies can then form the basis of decision-making
if there are planning applications for Gypsy and Traveller sites in the future.
7 DLUHC and MHCLG, Planning policy for Traveller sites, last updated December 2023
8 DLUHC and MHCLG, Planning policy for Traveller sites, last updated December 2023, para 27. Other
protected sites include: Sites of Special Scientific Interest, Local Green Space, Areas of Outstanding
Natural Beauty and National Parks.
9 DLUHC and MHCLG, Planning policy for Traveller sites, last updated December 2023, para 12
The policy defines travelling showpeople (who travel to hold fairs, circuses or
shows) separately and sets out different rules for mixed-used plots to be used
by travelling showpeople than for residential sites for Gypsies and Travellers.Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England

General principles
In allocating land for Gypsy and Traveller sites and setting out local policies
that should be considered in decision-making, the government’s planning
policy for Traveller sites advises LPAs that they should consider how they can:
• ensure that Gypsy and Traveller sites are “sustainable economically,
socially and environmentally”.
• promote the “peaceful and integrated co-existence between the site and
the local community”.
• ensure that children living on the site can attend school on a regular
basis and promote access to health services, while avoiding placing
undue pressure on local infrastructure and service.
• protect local amenity and the local environment.10
10 DLUHC and MHCLG, Planning policy for Traveller sites, last updated December 2023
11 Section 70(2) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990; Section 38(6) of the Planning and
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004
12 Section 20 of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004; DLUHC, National Planning Policy
Framework, last updated December 2023, para 3
13 DLUHC and MHCLG, Plan-making, last updated October 2021, para 57
14 DLUHC, National Planning Policy Framework, last updated December 2023, para 11
2 What is the role of local plans?
A local plan sets out the LPA’s vision and framework for the development and
land use in their area. It identifies what development is needed, where it
should go and what land is protected. All planning applications are decided
through evaluation against the local plan.11
A local plan must be prepared in line with the government’s National Planning
Policy Framework and its planning policy for Traveller sites.
Before it can be adopted, a local plan must first be examined by the Planning
Inspectorate, an executive agency of Department of Levelling Up, Housing
and Communities. A planning inspector will assess whether the local plan is
‘sound’.12 Among other factors, the inspector will consider whether the LPA
has adequately assessed the accommodation needs of Gypsies and Travellers
in its area and, if it identified a local need, whether it has allocated a
sufficient number of sites to meet that need.
An inspector can recommend changes to the local plan to make it ‘sound’.13
Because an LPA cannot have a local plan that has not been found ‘sound’, its
choice is between accepting the changes or not having a local plan (in which
case, the ‘presumption in favour of sustainable development’ will apply).14Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England

1.2 Changes to planning policy
In 2004, the Labour Government introduced section 225 of the Housing Act
2004. It required local housing authorities to assess the accommodation
needs of Gypsies and Travellers who permanently or temporarily resided in
their area. Local authorities had to prepare a strategy setting out how they
intended to meet these needs, as part of their wider housing strategy.15
Section 255 of the Housing Act 2004 worked in conjunction with changes the
Labour Government made to the planning system through the Planning and
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.16 The Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act
2004 introduced regional planning bodies. Regional planning bodies drew on
the assessments prepared by local housing authorities under the Housing Act
2004 to identify the accommodation needs of Gypsies and Travellers at a
regional level. Regional planning bodies then set pitch targets for individual
LPAs. LPAs had to ensure their local development plans allocated a sufficient
number of sites to meet the pitch targets for their area.17
The Labour Government published guidance on how LPAs should assess the
accommodation needs of Gypsies and Travellers and how they should plan to
meet their needs: Circular 01/06: Planning for Gypsy and Traveller Caravan
Sites (February 2006)18 and Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Needs
Assessment Guidance (October 2007).19 In May 2008, it also published a Good
Practice Guidance: Designing Gypsy and Traveller Sites (PDF).
The Coalition Government abolished regional planning bodies and strategies
with the Localism Act 2011.20 It also replaced Circular 01/06 with the planning
policy for Traveller sites in 2012 (updated in 2015 and 2023).21
In 2016, following a consultation, the Conservative Government also revoked
section 225 of the Housing Act 2004. The government said the change would
“simplify and streamline the processes for assessing needs [...] for planning
and housing purposes”.22
15 Section 8 of the Housing 1985; Section 225 of the Housing Act 2004, repealed in 2016 with section 124
of the Housing and Planning Act 2016
16 Part 1 of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004
17 Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (OPDM), Circular 01/06 (ODPM): Planning for Gypsy and Traveller
Caravan Sites, February 2006 [accessed via the National Archives]
18 OPDM, Circular 01/06 (ODPM): Planning for Gypsy and Traveller Caravan Sites, February 2006
[accessed via the National Archives]
19 DCLG and MHCLG, Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Needs Assessment Guidance, published
October 2007, withdrawn December 2016. The guidance was published under section 226 of the
Housing Act 2004, which was repealed in 2016 with section 124 of the Housing and Planning Act 2016
20 Section 109 of the Localism Act 2011
21 DCLG, Planning policy for Traveller sites, March 2012 [accessed via the National Archives]; DLUHC
and MHCLG, Planning policy for Traveller sites, last updated December 2023
22 Section 124 of the Housing and Planning Act 2016; MHCLG, Planning and Travellers: Proposed
changes to planning policy and guidance, last updated September 2014Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England
A 2023 report by the charity Friends, Families and Travellers, which works on
behalf of Gypsies, Travellers and Roma, provides an overview of the changes
to planning policy. The report highlights the importance of accommodation
security on the health, education and employment of Gypsies and Travellers.Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England


2 How are Gypsies and Travellers defined
in planning policy?
Gypsies and Travellers are defined in planning policy as “persons of nomadic
habit of life whatever their race or origin”. The current definition includes
people who have temporarily or permanently stopped travelling for reasons
relating to health, education or old age. 23 Travelling showpeople are defined
separately in planning policy.
2.1 Changes to the definition over time
Gypsies and Travellers have always been defined as “persons of nomadic
habit of life” in planning policy. However, the government’s approach to
Gypsies and Travellers who have given up travelling has changed over the
years:
• From 1994 to 2006, Gypsies and Travellers were defined based on
nomadism.
• From 2006 to 2015, the definition of Gypsies and Travellers in planning
policy included those who had ceased travelling, whether temporarily or
permanently, for reasons of educational or health needs, or old age.24
Following a consultation, the government changed the definition of Gypsies
and Travellers in planning policy in 2015 to exclude those who had stopped
travelling permanently.25 In its response to the consultation, the government
said members of Gypsy and Traveller communities and their representatives
had raised concerns about changing the definition, but most LPAs which had
responded to the consultation had expressed support for the change.26
In the consultation, the government said applications from Gypsies and
Travellers who had stopped travelling permanently should not be treated
differently to applications from other settled populations:
23 DLUHC and MHCLG, Planning policy for Traveller sites, last updated December 2023
24 Housing (Assessment of Accommodation Needs) (Meaning of Gypsies and Travellers) (England)
Regulations 2006; OPDM, Circular 01/06 (ODPM): Planning for Gypsy and Traveller Caravan Sites,
February 2006 [accessed via the National Archives], para 15
25 MHCLG, Planning and travellers: Proposed changes to planning policy and guidance, last updated
September 2014
26 MHCLG, Planning and Travellers: Proposed changes to planning policy and guidance. Consultation
response (PDF), September 2014, para 3.6Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England
where a member of the travelling community has given up travelling
permanently, for whatever reason, and applies for a permanent site then that
should be treated no differently to an application from the settled population
[...]. This would not prevent applications for permanent sites, but would mean
that such applications would be considered as any other application for a
permanent caravan site would be: i.e. not in the context of Planning Policy for
Traveller Sites.27
A 2016 article in the Traveller Times highlighted concerns that the change in
definition could force Gypsies and Travellers “back into the road [...] in order
to ‘prove’ our ethnic identity and heritage to retain our homes”.28 A report by
the charity Friends, Families and Travellers said that the change in definition
had led “to a dramatic reduction in the assessed need”.29

2.2 Legal challenge to definition
The government’s decision to change the definition of Gypsies and Travellers
in planning policy in 2015 formed the basis of a judicial review. Judicial review
means the decision of a public body, such as a planning decision taken by the
Planning Inspectorate, is challenged in court. The focus of judicial review is on
whether a decision was made in a proper and lawful manner.
Lisa Smith challenged in court the refusal of her application for planning
permission (by the LPA and the Planning Inspectorate on appeal) for a
permanent site for Gypsies and Travellers at Coalville in Leicestershire. Her
representatives argued that the 2015 definition unlawfully discriminated
against elderly and disabled Gypsies and Travellers.
In its June 2021 judgement, the High Court decided that the definition was not
unlawful because the exclusion of permanently settled Gypsies and Travellers
was “objectively and reasonably justified”. The judge ruling on the case said:
the Secretary of State was plainly justified in drawing a distinction between the
specific land-use needs of those seeking to lead a nomadic lifestyle and those
seeking a more settled existence.30
Ms Smith then appealed the decision of the High Court in the Court of Appeal.
The Court of Appeal allowed the appeal. The judges on the case said that “the
27 MHCLG, Planning and travellers: Proposed changes to planning policy and guidance: Consultation:
Planning and Travellers (PDF), September 2014, para 2.3
28 Dosta, Grinta, Enough! - Gypsy and Traveller rally at Parliament on Saturday 21st May, Traveller
Times, 19 May 2016 [accessed 26 April 2024]
29 Friends, Families & Travellers, Kicking the can down the road: New report on site provision over the
past 60 years, November 2023
30 Smith v Secretary of State for Housing, Communities and Local Government and Others [2021] EWHC
1650 (Admin); Planning policy definition of "Travellers" upheld (High Court), Practical Law
[subscription required], 29 June 2021 [accessed 22 April 2024]Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England
effect of the relevant exclusion was [...] discriminatory, and [...] there was no
proper justification for that discrimination”.31
The Court of Appeal quashed the decision made by the Planning Inspectorate
(to refuse planning permission to Lisa Smith) and returned the decision to the
Secretary of State (on behalf of whom the Planning Inspectorate had made
the planning decision originally) for redetermination.
The judges emphasised, however, that the focus of the case and their decision
were the “particular circumstances of this case”. They noted that the Court of
Appeal did not rule on whether the 2015 definition was unlawful in general.32

2.3 Subsequent change to definition
Following the judgment in the Court of Appeal, however, the government
announced in December 2023 that it would revert to the definition used before
2015. It amended its planning policy for Traveller sites accordingly on 19
December 2023.33 The policy now defines Gypsies and Travellers as follows:
1. For the purposes of this planning policy “gypsies and travellers” means:
Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin, including such
persons who on grounds only of their own or their family’s or dependants’
educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel temporarily or
permanently, but excluding members of an organised group of travelling
showpeople or circus people travelling together as such.
2. In determining whether persons are “gypsies and travellers” for the
purposes of this planning policy, consideration should be given to the following
issues amongst other relevant matters:
a) whether they previously led a nomadic habit of life
b) the reasons for ceasing their nomadic habit of life
c) whether there is an intention of living a nomadic habit of life in the future,
and if so, how soon and in what circumstances.34
The government said it intends “review this area of policy and case law” in
2024.35 At the time of publication of this briefing, further information on this
review has not yet been published.
An article in the Traveller Times stated that the government’s decisions to
revert to the definition used prior to 2015 was welcomed by Gypsy and
31 Smith v Secretary of State for Levelling Up, Housing & Communities & Anor [2022] EWCA Civ 1391;
Planning policy definition of "Travellers" was indirectly discriminatory and unjustified (Court of
Appeal), Practical Law [subscription required], 2 November 2022 [accessed 22 April 2024]
32 Smith v Secretary of State for Levelling Up, Housing & Communities & Anor [2022] EWCA Civ 1391
33 HCWS161 [The Next Stage in Our Long Term Plan for Housing Update] 19 December 2023
34 DLUHC and MHCLG, Planning policy for Traveller sites, last updated December 2023
35 HCWS161 [The Next Stage in Our Long Term Plan for Housing Update] 19 December 2023Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England

Traveller campaigners and their representative groups. The article also
explained the importance of the change in definition:
those two extra additional words [in the definition on planning policy] (or
permanently) basically means that elderly and/or permanently disabled
Travellers who can no longer travel are now allowed to continue living on
existing Traveller sites, or to develop, build and live on their own Traveller
sites.36
36 Back to the future with 'gypsy status'?, Traveller Times, 15 January 2024 [accessed 26 April 2024]Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England

3 Permissions needed for Gypsy and
Traveller sites
To station caravans on land, planning permission from the local planning
authority (LPA) may be needed. If a caravan site is run by a private company
or organisation rather than the local authority, it may also require a site
licence from the local authority.
3.1 Planning permission
Someone wanting to station caravans on land will usually require planning
permission from the LPA because it constitutes ‘development’ under the
planning system. If caravans intended for residential use are stationed on
land that is used for other purposes (such as agricultural land), this may also
constitute a ‘material change of use’ that requires planning permission.37
Exceptions apply if the development or material change of use are covered by
‘permitted development rights’. These provide that planning permission from
the LPA is usually not required, for example, to station up to three caravans
on land that is at least five acres for up to 28 days (in any 12 months).38
For further information about ‘permitted development rights’ and what it
means to ‘materially’ change the use of land, see the Library briefing on
Permitted development and change of use (March 2024).
How do LPAs decide planning applications?
LPAs will decide planning applications in line with their local plan, unless
‘material considerations’ indicate otherwise.39 If LPAs identified a need for
Gypsy and Traveller sites in their area (see section 1.1), their local plan will
usually set out where these sites should be located.
If LPAs receive planning applications for land that is not allocated for Gypsy
and Traveller sites in local plans, or where the LPA has not identified a need
for Gypsy and Traveller sites in its area, the government’s planning policy for
37 Section 55 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990; Shelter
38 Part 5 of Schedule 2 of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England)
Order 2015; Schedule 1 of the Caravan Sites and Control of Development Act 1960
39 Section 70(2) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990; Section 38(6) of the Planning and
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England
Traveller sites advises them to use ‘locally specific criteria’ and other relevant
policies in their local plans to guide the allocation of sites.
The government’s planning policy for Traveller sites also advises LPAs to
consider the following matters when assessing planning applications for
Gypsy and Traveller sites:
• the level of existing local provision and the need for new sites.
• the availability (or lack) of alternative accommodation for applicants.
• the personal circumstances of the applicant.
• the effective use of previously developed, untidy or derelict land.42
The policy advises LPAs to “very strictly limit” new sites in the countryside that
are away from existing settlements or on sites not allocated in the local plan.
It also advises LPAs to ensure that sites in rural areas “respect the scale of,
and do not dominate, the nearest settled community” and do not place an
“undue pressure” on the local infrastructure.43
What is the role of views of the local community?
Before making a decision on any planning application, an LPA is required to
hold a public consultation to allow local residents to express their views on
the proposed development.44 Anyone can respond to a consultation.
40 Section 70(2) of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990; Section 38(6) of the Planning and
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004
41 DLUHC and MHCLG, Determining a planning application, last updated December 2023, para 8
42 DLUHC and MHCLG, Planning policy for Traveller sites, last updated December 2023, para 24
43 DLUHC and MHCLG, Planning policy for Traveller sites, last updated December 2023, para 25
44 Article 15 of the Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order
2015
3 What are material considerations?
Material considerations are reasons why an LPA can decide a planning
application in a way that is not in line with its local plan.40
There is no statutory definition or set list of material considerations. However,
the courts have generally ruled that purely private interests, for example, the
impact on neighbouring property values, cannot be material considerations.41
One material consideration is the National Planning Policy Framework, which
sets out the government’s planning policies, and the government’s planning
policy for Traveller sites is a material consideration for Gypsy and Traveller
sites. A (non-exhaustive) list of other material considerations is set out on the
government’s planning portal.Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England
An LPA must take the representations that it receives in response to its
consultation into account when making its decision.45 However, an LPA will
not necessarily refuse planning permission if residents object to a planning
application. It may still grant planning permission if its local plan or other
material considerations indicate otherwise.
For further information about how individuals can get involved in the planning
process, see the Library article, Influencing the planning process (England)
(August 2023).
The government’s planning policy for Traveller sites advises LPAs to consider
how they can overcome objections, such as by attaching conditions to
planning permission or negotiating planning obligations. For example, LPAs
could limit the number of days caravans can stay on a site or the number of
caravans that can be stationed on a site at any point in time.46
3.2 Gypsy and Traveller sites on green belt land
The government’s National Planning Framework says that development on
the green belt is generally “inappropriate” and “is, by definition, harmful to
the Green Belt”.49 It provides that LPAs should grant planning permission to
development on the green belt only in “very special circumstances”.50
45 Article 33 of the Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order
2015
46 DLUHC and MHCLG, Determining a planning application, last updated December 2023, para
47 Section 78 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990; Schedule 6 of the Town and Country Planning
Act 1990
48 Section 79 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990
49 The purpose of the “green belt” is to prevent urban sprawl by keeping land permanently open
around urban areas. It is for LPAs to define and maintain green belt land in their areas.
50 DLUHC, National Planning Policy Framework, last updated December 2023, para 152
4 What if planning permission is refused?
If an LPA refuses planning permission, the applicant can appeal that decision.
Most appeals are decided by the Planning Inspectorate, an executive agency
of the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities (DLUHC).47
The Secretary of State can “recover” an appeal for their own determination,
instead of letting the Planning Inspectorate make a decision on it.48
For further information about challenges to LPA’s decisions, see the Library
briefing on planning appeals (England) (April 2024). For further information
about the Secretary of State’s powers, see the Library briefing on ‘call-in’ of
planning applications (England) (April 2024).Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England
The government’s planning policy for Traveller sites clarifies that temporary
and permanent Gypsy and Traveller sites on the green belt are considered
“inappropriate development”. It says that personal circumstances and unmet
need are unlikely to constitute “very special circumstances”, although in
decisions affecting children, this is “subject to the best interests of the child”:
Subject to the best interests of the child, personal circumstances and unmet
need are unlikely to clearly outweigh harm to the Green Belt and any other
harm so as to establish very special circumstances.51
An equalities statement supporting the government’s 2015 consultation on its
planning policy for Traveller sites explains the meaning of the term “subject to
the best interest of the child”:
Recent UK case law derived from the United Nations Convention on the Rights
of the Child (UNCRC) establishes that the best interests of the child are a
primary consideration in planning decisions affecting children, and that no
consideration is inherently more important than the best interests of the child.
Substantial weight should therefore continue to be given to the best interests
of the child.52
For further information about (general) green belt planning policy, see the
Library briefing on the green belt (December 2023).
Recovery of appeals related to sites on green belt land
In 2013, the government adopted a policy that the Secretary of State would
consider ‘recovering’ planning appeals (see box 4) related to Gypsy and
Traveller sites. The Secretary of State’s decision to recover two of these
appeals was challenged in 2014 on equalities grounds, and the government
subsequently dropped the policy in 2015. Further information is set out below.
In a written statement in July 2013, the then Under-Secretary of State at the
Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG), Brandon Lewis,
announced that the Secretary of State would consider ‘recovering’ planning
appeals related to Gypsy and Traveller sites on green belt land. He said the
Secretary of State would not necessarily recover all relevant appeals.53
If an appeal is recovered, the Secretary of State, rather than a planning
inspector, makes the final decision on the appeal.
In January 2014, Brandon Lewis said the Secretary of State would continue to
consider recovering appeals related to Gypsy and Traveller sites on green belt
land. He said the government was concerned whether appeal decisions were
51 DLUHC and MHCLG, Planning policy for Traveller sites, last updated December 2023, para 16
52 MHCLG, Planning and travellers: Proposed changes to planning policy and guidance: Equalities
Statement (PDF), last updated September 2014
53 HC Deb 1 July 2013, c23WSGypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England
meeting the government’s policy intention and gave “sufficient weight [...] to
the importance of green belt protection”.54
Legal challenge to recovery of appeals
The Secretary of State’s decision to recover appeals related to Gypsy and
Traveller sites on green belt land formed the basis of a judicial review. Sarah
Coates and Charmaine Moore challenged the Secretary of State’s decision to
recover their appeals in the High Court on equalities grounds. The claimants
had appealed the refusal of planning permission for caravan sites (at Hone in
Kent and in the London Borough of Bromley) with the Planning Inspectorate,
and their appeals had been recovered by the Secretary of State.55
The court found that, although it was not the intention set out in the written
ministerial statements, the Secretary of State recovered 100% of relevant
appeals in September 2013. In September 2014, once they were notified about
possible judicial review proceedings, the Secretary of State recovered 75% of
relevant appeals. This led to a “very substantial” delay in decision-making.56
The judge ruling on the case concluded that, although the written ministerial
statements were not unlawful, “the practice of recovering all appeals, or an
arbitrary percentage thereof, was and is unlawful”.
The judge said the Secretary of State’s decision to recover all or a certain
percentage of appeals breached the Equalities Act 2010, because it had put
Gypsies and Travellers at “a very real disadvantage” (because their appeals
took longer to determine). The judge also said, in the cases of Mrs Moore and
Ms Coates, the Secretary of State also breached the European Convention of
Human Rights. The judge therefore quashed the Secretary of State’s decision
to recover the appeals made by Sarah Coates and Charmaine Moore.57
The judge emphasised that the judgement did not prevent the Secretary of
State from recovering appeals related to Gypsy and Traveller sites, as long as
the Secretary of State’s decisions were based on the individual merits of each
case and “properly considered [...] within the parameters of the 2010 Act”.58
Subsequent change to policy
In a ministerial statement in December 2015, the then Housing and Planning
Minister, Brandon Lewis, announced that the government would “consider the
recovery of a proportion of relevant appeals” in line with its 2008 ministerial
statement (in line with which decisions on recovery are made generally). He
54 MHCLG, Written statement to Parliament: Green belt, January 2014
55 Moore & Anor v Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government [2015] EWHC 44 (Admin)
56 Moore & Anor v Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government [2015] EWHC 44 (Admin)
57 Moore & Anor v Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government [2015] EWHC 44 (Admin)
58 Moore & Anor v Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government [2015] EWHC 44 (Admin)Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England
said the Secretary of State would decide to recover appeals based on “the
particular circumstances of the case”.59
The minister further said the Planning Inspectorate would “monitor all appeal
decisions involving unauthorised development in the Green Belt”. He said the
government would review this approach after six months to see “whether it is
delivering our objective of protecting land from intentional unauthorised
development”.60 The government has not provided an update on its approach
or made any further statement or announcements on the matter since 2015.
3.3 Caravan site licence
In addition to planning permission, the people wanting to station caravans on
land may also require a site licence under the Caravan Sites and Control of
Development Act 1960.61 The term “caravan site” is defined as “any land on
which a caravan is stationed for the purposes of human habitation and land
which is used in conjunction with land on which a caravan is stationed”.62
A site licence is not required if conditions set out in Schedule 1 of the 1960 Act
are met, for example, if up three caravans are stationed on land of at least
five acres for a maximum period of 28 days (in any 12 months) or for caravans
by travelling showpeople who are members of an organisation.63 Sites owned
by local authorities also do not require a site licence.
Caravan site licences are issued by local authorities. A local authority can
attach conditions to a site licence (for example, limiting the number of days
caravans can be stationed on a site or the number of caravans allowed on a
site).64
59 HCWS423 [Green Belt protection and intentional unauthorised development] 17 December 2015; HC
Deb 30 June 2008, c44WS
60 HCWS423 [Green Belt protection and intentional unauthorised development] 17 December 2015
61 Section 1 and 3 of the Caravan Sites and Control of Development Act 1960
62 Section 1(4) of the Caravan Sites and Control of Development Act 1960
63 Schedule 1 of the Caravan Sites and Control of Development Act 1960
64 Section 5 of the Caravan Sites and Control of Development Act 1960Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England

4 Number of caravan sites
Twice a year (in January and July),65 local authorities count the number of
caravans on Gypsy and Traveller sites in their area. This data is published by
the government. The data provides a snapshot of how many caravans reside
in a local authority’s area on the day of the count. It does not cover how many
people live in a caravan.
At the time of the most recent count in July 2023, local authorities counted a
total of 25,220 caravans on Gypsy and Traveller sites in England. This is a 21%
increase compared with July 2013.66 The chart below shows the increase in the
number of caravans on Gypsy and Traveller sites since January 1979.67
In July 2023, 26% of all caravans on Gypsy and Traveller sites were on public
sites,68 60% were on authorised private sites and 14% were on unauthorised
sites. Of the around 3,531 caravans on unauthorised sites, 2,920 (83%) were
on land owned by Gypsies or Travellers, and 611 (17%) were unauthorised
encampments on belonging to private landowners or local authorities.69
65 Due to national lockdowns during the Covid-19 pandemic, the count of caravans on Gypsy and
Traveller sites was suspended in July 2020 and January 2021.
66 The total number of caravans on Gypsy and Traveller sites in January 2023 was 24,925. This is a 29%
increase compared to January 2013.
67 DLUHC, Traveller caravan count: Table 4, last updated 23 November 2023 [accessed 24 April 2024]
68 Public sites include Gypsy and Traveller sites operated by local authorities and private registered
providers of social housing, including housing associations, trusts and cooperatives.
69 DLUHC, Traveller caravan count: Table 4, last updated 23 November 2023 [accessed 24 April 2024]
Source: DLUHC, Traveller caravan count: Table 4, last updated 23 November 2023 [accessed 24 April
2024]
England, 1979 to 2023 (in thousands)
Number of caravans on Gypsy and Traveller sites
0
5
10
15
20
25
1979 1983 1987 1991 1995 1999 2003 2007 2011 2015 2019 2023
January
JulyGypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England

The chart below shows the number of caravans on authorised private sites
has increased over time, compared with public sites. The number of caravans
on private sites surpassed the number on public sites in 2008. In July 2023,
caravans on private sites made up 70% of caravans on all authorised sites,
compared with 32% in July 1983.
The chart also shows that the number of caravans on unauthorised sites has
decreased over time. In July 1983, the number of caravans on unauthorised
sites made up from 43% of all caravans on Gypsy and Traveller sites. In 2023,
it made up 14%.
Source: DLUHC, Traveller caravan count: Table 4, last updated 23 November 2023 [accessed 24 April
2024]
Most caravans are on private Gypsy and Traveller sites
England, 1979 to 2023 (July count, in thousands)
0
3
6
9
12
15
1979 1983 1987 1991 1995 1999 2003 2007 2011 2015 2019 2023
Private sites
Public sites
Unauthorised sitesGypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England

5 Dealing with unauthorised
developments and encampments
Failure to obtain planning permission where it is required is ‘unauthorised
development’. It can result in enforcement action by the local authority.
Entering and occupying land belonging to private landowners or public
authorities without their permission is an ‘unauthorised encampment’. The
police have powers to take to deal with unauthorised encampments.
5.1 Unauthorised developments
Unauthorised development occurs when land is developed, or there has been
a material change of use of land, but the appropriate planning permission is
not obtained in advance. Failure to obtain planning permission where it is
required is considered a ‘breach in planning control’.70
It is also a planning breach not to comply with the conditions a local planning
authority (LPA) has attached to planning permission (for example, if more
caravans are stationed on land than permitted or they stay on a temporary
site for longer than allowed).
LPAs may allow a ‘retrospective planning application’ where permission has
not been sought and a breach has occurred. LPAs can also take enforcement
action against planning breaches. It is up to LPAs to decide whether they take
enforcement action and what type of action they take.
The government’s National Planning Policy Framework advises LPAs to “act
proportionately” in responding to planning breaches. It also notes, however,
that “effective enforcement is important to maintain public confidence in the
planning system”.71 Its planning policy for Traveller sites advises LPAs to “aim
to reduce the number of unauthorised developments” in their plan-making
and decision-taking.72
An article by the charity Shelter highlights that, when considering whether
they take enforcement action against Gypsy and Traveller sites, LPAs should
70 Section 171A of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990
71 DLUHC, National Planning Policy Framework, last updated December 2023, para 59
72 DLUHC and MHCLG, Planning policy for Traveller sites, last updated December 2023, para 4fGypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England
consider whether taking this enforcement action is in line with the European
Convention on Human Rights.73
What enforcement powers do LPAs have?
One of the tools at an LPA’s disposal are enforcement notices.74 Enforcement
notices require an individual or developer to take certain steps to remedy a
planning breach, for example to stop certain activities or to remove buildings
or works from land.
It is a criminal offence not to comply with an enforcement notice, with a
penalty on conviction of an unlimited fine.75 If a person who has been served
with an enforcement notice does not comply with the notice, an LPA can also
take steps to remedy the planning breach itself and recover the costs from
the owner or occupier of the land.76
Generally, LPAs must take enforcement action within 10 years of a planning
breach occurring.77 Where a breach has been deliberately concealed, an LPA
could apply to the magistrate’s court for an enforcement order which would
allow it to take enforcement action after that time limit has expired.78
For further information about LPA’s enforcement powers, see government
guidance on enforcement and post-permission matters and a Library briefing
on planning enforcement in England (July 2019).
Appeals against enforcement action
It is possible to appeal the LPA’s refusal of retrospective planning permission
and an enforcement notice.
However, the person who undertook unauthorised development has only one
opportunity to obtain planning permission retrospectively: either by applying
for retrospective planning permission or by appealing an enforcement notice
on the grounds that they should have been granted planning permission.79
73 Shelter, Occupation and eviction rules for Travellers on their own land, last updated March 2021
74 Section 172 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990
75 DLUHC and MHCLG, Enforcement and post-permission matters, last updated April 2024, para 22
76 Section 179 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990; Section 178 of the Town and Country
Planning 1990
77 Section 171B of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, as amended by Section 115 of the Levelling-
up and Regeneration Act 2023; Commencement regulations
78 DLUHC and MHCLG, Enforcement and post-permission matters, last updated April 2024, paras 24-17
79 Section 174 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, as amended by section 118 of the Levelling-
up and Regeneration Act 2023; DLUHC and MHCLG, Enforcement and post-permission matters, last
updated April 2024, para 13Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England

5.2 Failure to obtain a site licence
It is an offence not to obtain a caravan site licence where it is required, with a
penalty on conviction of an unlimited fine.80
It is also an offence not to comply with the conditions that are attached to a
site licence (for example, conditions limiting the number of caravans or the
number of days that caravans can be stationed on a site). On conviction, it is
subject to a fine up to £2,500. If a site owner has been convicted of failing to
comply with site licence conditions at least twice, a local authority can also
apply to the magistrate’s court to revoke their site licence.81
5.3 Unauthorised encampments
Unauthorised encampments occur if trespassers occupy land belonging to
private landowners or public authorities without their permission. The police
have powers to deal with unauthorised encampments.
In 2022, following a consultation, the government lowered the threshold at
which police can use powers in the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act
2022 to deal with unauthorised encampments.82 The 2022 Act also created
new offence of residing in, or with, a vehicle on land without permission.
What powers do police have to deal with unauthorised
encampments?
Under the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994, as amended by the
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022, police have the following
powers to deal with unauthorised encampments:
• Under section 60, it is a criminal offence to reside in, or with, a vehicle on
land without consent and to have caused or be likely to cause significant
damage, disruption, destruction, or distress.
• Section 61 gives the police the power to direct people away from land if
they are in an encampment that consists of at least six vehicles, they are
deemed to have caused “damage, disruption or distress”, or their
encampment is on (or partly on) a highway.
80 Section 1(2) of the Caravan Sites and Control of Development Act 1960
81 Section 9 of the Caravan Sites and Control of Development Act 1960; Sentencing Council, Approach
to the assessment of fines: Maximum fines, undated [accessed 24 April 2024]
82 MHCLG, Home Office and Ministry of Justice Powers for dealing with unauthorised development and
encampments, last updated February 2019; Home Office, Unauthorised encampments: Guidance for
police, last updated July 2022Gypsies and Travellers: Planning provisions in England
• Section 62A allows a senior officer to direct those in an unauthorised
encampment consisting of at least one vehicle and caravan to leave land
if the local authority can provide a suitable pitch elsewhere in the area.83
It is an offence not to comply with a police direction to leave, or to return to
land within 12 months of being directed to leave. Those who do not comply
can also have their vehicles seized. Police powers are applied in the same way
to private and public land.84
For further information about the changes the 2022 Act introduced, see the
Library briefing on the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Bill. For further
information about police powers in relation to unauthorised encampments,
see the Library briefing on policy powers: Unauthorised encampments.
83 Sections 60 to 62A of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994, as amended by Part 4 of the
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022
84 Sections 60 to 62A of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994, as amended by Part 4 of the
Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act 2022The House of Commons Library is a research and
information service based in the UK Parliament.
Our impartial analysis, statistical research and
resources help MPs and their staff scrutinise
legislation, develop policy, and support constituents.
Our published material is available to everyone
on commonslibrary.parliament.uk.
Get our latest research delivered straight to your inbox.
Subscribe at commonslibrary.parliament.uk/subscribe
or scan the code below:
commonslibrary.parliament.uk
@commonslibrary
