commonslibrary.parliament.uk
Research Briefing
1 August 2024
By Hannah Cromarty, Cassie Barton
Gypsies and Travellers:
Accommodation in England
Summary
1 Where do Gypsies and Travellers live?
2 Assessing Gypsy and Traveller housing needs
3 Accommodation challenges facing Gypsies and Travellers
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
2 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
Number 10070
Image Credits
Brooks Green. Image supplied by Broadland Housing Association, Norwich.
Disclaimer
The Commons Library does not intend the information in our research
publications and briefings to address the specific circumstances of any
particular individual. We have published it to support the work of MPs. You
should not rely upon it as legal or professional advice, or as a substitute for
it. We do not accept any liability whatsoever for any errors, omissions or
misstatements contained herein. You should consult a suitably qualified
professional if you require specific advice or information. Read our briefing
‘Legal help: where to go and how to pay’ for further information about
sources of legal advice and help. This information is provided subject to the
conditions of the Open Parliament Licence.
Sources and subscriptions for MPs and staff
We try to use sources in our research that everyone can access, but
sometimes only information that exists behind a paywall or via a subscription
is available. We provide access to many online subscriptions to MPs and
parliamentary staff, please contact hoclibraryonline@parliament.uk or visit
commonslibrary.parliament.uk/resources for more information.
Feedback
Every effort is made to ensure that the information contained in these publicly
available briefings is correct at the time of publication. Readers should be
aware however that briefings are not necessarily updated to reflect
subsequent changes.
If you have any comments on our briefings please email
papers@parliament.uk. Please note that authors are not always able to
engage in discussions with members of the public who express opinions
about the content of our research, although we will carefully consider and
correct any factual errors.
You can read our feedback and complaints policy and our editorial policy at
commonslibrary.parliament.uk. If you have general questions about the work
of the House of Commons email hcenquiries@parliament.uk.
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
3 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
Contents
Summary 4
1 Where do Gypsies and Travellers live? 6
1.1 The 2021 census 6
1.2 Number of caravans on Traveller sites 7
1.3 Types of Traveller sites 8
1.4 Traveller sites provided by social housing providers 9
1.5 Site residents’ rights and responsibilities 10
2 Assessing Gypsy and Traveller housing needs 11
2.1 Planning for traveller sites 12
3 Accommodation challenges facing Gypsies and Travellers 13
3.1 Access to Traveller sites and housing 13
3.2 Living conditions on Traveller sites 14
3.3 Homelessness 17
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
4 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
Summary
This briefing looks at Gypsies’ and Travellers’ accommodation in England.
The term ‘Gypsies and Travellers’ encompasses a range of ethnic and cultural
groups, many of which practice nomadism (where people do not have a single
fixed accommodation but move from place to place) and/or have a nomadic
heritage. Some of the groups included in this label are Welsh Gypsies,
Scottish Gypsies/Travellers and Irish Travellers. For further information see
the Library series of briefings on Gypsies and Travellers.
A report by the House of Commons Women and Equalities Select
Committee highlights that “while some find the term “Gypsy” to be offensive,
many […] were proud to associate themselves with this term”. It is therefore
also used in this briefing.
Where do Gypsies and Travellers live?
Many Gypsies and Travellers live in settled accommodation and do not travel,
or do not travel all the time, but nonetheless consider travelling to be part of
their identity. At the 2021 census, the majority (78%) of Gypsies and Irish
Travellers in England and Wales lived in bricks-and-mortar accommodation,
and 22% lived in a caravan or other mobile or temporary structure.
There were 26,632 Traveller caravans in England in January 2024, an increase
of 36% since July 2013. The majority (61%) of caravans were on authorised
private sites, 25% were on sites operated by local authorities and registered
providers of social housing, and 14% were on unauthorised sites.
In July 2023, the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities
recorded 282 sites operated by local authorities and registered providers of
social housing. There were 4,476 pitches available on these sites, of which
4,211 were residential pitches and 565 were transit pitches (for short-term
stays). In total across these pitches, there was capacity for 7,233 caravans.
The government does not publish data on the number of private Traveller
pitches or sites.
Assessing Gypsy and Traveller housing needs
Local housing authorities are no longer required to carry out a specific,
separate assessment of the accommodation needs of Gypsies and Travellers
in their local area. However, they still have a general duty to assess the
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
5 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
housing needs of everyone in their area. Local authorities should then
consider how to meet the accommodation needs identified in the assessment.
The Commons Library briefing on planning provisions for Gypsies and
Travellers in England explains how local planning authorities should plan for
new Gypsy and Traveller sites where a local need is identified.
When drawing up their strategies for preventing and reducing homelessness,
local housing authorities are required to consider the needs of all groups of
people in their district who are homeless or likely to become homeless,
including Gypsies and Travellers. Local authorities should also consider the
needs and lifestyle of applicants who are Gypsies and Travellers when
carrying out their duties under the homelessness legislation.
Accommodation challenges facing Gypsies
and Travellers
A lack of suitable, secure accommodation contributes to many of the
inequalities that Gypsy and Traveller communities experience, and can be a
source of tension between travelling and settled communities.
Accommodation challenges include:
• a shortage of suitable, authorised Traveller sites,
• difficulties in accessing suitable ‘bricks-and-mortar’ housing and
sustaining tenancies, and
• poor living conditions on some Traveller sites, including isolated
locations, a lack of basic amenities and overcrowding.
The 2019 Conservative government allocated £10 million of capital funding in
2022/23 to support nine local authorities to improve Traveller sites.
Research in 2022 by the Office for National Statistics on the lived experiences
of Gypsies and Travellers found both community members and local and
central government participants regarded increasing the provision of
permanent and transit Traveller sites as an important way to address the
accommodation challenges of Gypsies and Travellers. There was also a
consensus that sites should be designed through consultation with
communities.
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
6 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
1 Where do Gypsies and Travellers live?
Although Gypsies and Travellers generally see travelling as part of their
identity, they can choose to live in different ways, including:
• moving regularly around the country from site to site and being ‘on the
road’
• living permanently in caravans or mobile homes, on sites provided by the
council, or on private sites
• living in settled accommodation during winter or school term-time,
travelling during the summer months
• living in ‘bricks and mortar’ housing, settled together, but still retaining a
strong commitment to Gypsy/Traveller culture and traditions.3
1.1 The 2021 census
The 2021 census in England and Wales collected data on people who gave
their ethnicity as ‘Gypsy or Irish Traveller’. The majority (78%) of people in this
1
 Traveller Movement, Gypsy Roma and Traveller History and Culture, undated (accessed 23 July
2024); Equality and Human Rights Commission, Inequalities experienced by Gypsy and Traveller
communities: A review, S Cemlyn et al, 2 February 2009
2
 Women and Equalities Committee, Tackling inequalities faced by Gypsy, Roma and Traveller
communities, HC 360 2017-19, 5 April 2019
3
 The Traveller Movement, Gypsy Roma and Traveller History and Culture (accessed 1 August 2024)
Who are Gypsies and Travellers?
The term ‘Gypsies and Travellers’ encompasses a range of ethnic and cultural
groups, many of which practice nomadism (where people do not have a single
fixed accommodation but move from place to place) and/or have a nomadic
heritage. Some of the groups included in this label are Welsh Gypsies, Scottish
Gypsies/Travellers and Irish Travellers.1 For further information see the Library
series of briefings on Gypsies and Travellers.
A report by the House of Commons Women and Equalities Select Committee
highlights that “while some find the term “Gypsy” to be offensive, many […]
were proud to associate themselves with this term”. It is therefore also used in
this briefing.2
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
7 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
group lived in bricks-and-mortar accommodation.4 This compared to more
than 99% of all people in England and Wales. The remaining 22% of Gypsies
and Irish Travellers said they lived in a caravan or other mobile or temporary
structure.5

Gypsies and Irish Travellers were less likely to own their home – 28% lived in
an owner-occupying household, compared with 63% of the population of
England and Wales.Gypsies and Irish Travellers were more than twice as
likely to live in social rented accommodation than the general population
(42% compared with 17%).6
Gypsies and Irish Travellers were over three times more likely to live in
overcrowded accommodation than the general population (27% compared
with 8%).7
1.2 Number of caravans on Traveller sites
The Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG)
(previously called the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities
(DLUHC)) publishes official statistics on the number of caravans on Traveller
sites.
8
 The data is collected by local authorities in January and July each
year. The data provides a snapshot of the number of caravans that reside in a
local authority’s area on the day of the count. It does not cover the number of
occupants residing in a caravan.
4
 The term ‘bricks-and-mortar’ is commonly used by Gypsies and Travellers when talking about
homes which are permanent structures, such as houses or flats.
5
 Office for National Statistics, Gypsy or Irish Traveller populations, England and Wales: Census 2021,
13 October 2023 6
 As above, Gypsy or Irish traveller populations data: housing, Table 6
7
 As above. Overcrowding is calculated by comparing the number of bedrooms the household
requires to the number of available bedrooms.
8
 The government refers to ‘Traveller sites’ rather than ‘Gypsy and Traveller sites’ because this is in
line with terminology used for planning purposes, and because the data captures caravans lived in
by a wider range of people than those with a Gypsy or Traveller ethnicity.
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
8 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
At the time of the most recent count in January 2024, local authorities
counted a total of 26,632 caravans on Traveller sites in England. This is a 36%
increase compared to July 2013. The chart above shows the increase in the
number of caravans on Traveller sites since January 1979.9
1.3 Types of Traveller sites
MHCLG collects information about caravans on:
• authorised public sites,10
• authorised private sites,
• unauthorised developments (sites on land owned by travellers for which
planning permission has not been granted), and
• unauthorised encampments (sites on land not owned by travellers and
which do not have planning permission).
In January 2024, 25% of all caravans on Traveller sites were on public sites,
61% were on authorised private sites and 14% were on unauthorised sites. Of
the around 3,658 caravans on unauthorised sites, 3,357 (92%) were on land
9
 DLUHC, Traveller caravan count: Table 4, last updated 5 June 2024 (accessed 1 August 2024)
10 Public sites include Gypsy and Traveller sites operated by local authorities and private registered
providers of social housing, including housing associations, trusts and cooperatives.
Source: DLUHC, Traveller caravan count: Table 4, last updated 5 June 2024 (accessed 13 July 2024)
Note: Due to national lockdowns during the Covid-19 pandemic, the count of caravans on Gypsy and
Traveller sites was suspended in July 2020 and January 2021
England, 1979 to 2024 (in thousands)
Number of caravans on Traveller sites
0
5
10
15
20
25
1979 1983 1987 1991 1995 1999 2003 2007 2011 2015 2019 2023
January
July
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
9 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
owned by Gypsies or Travellers, and 301 (8%) were unauthorised
encampments on land belonging to private landowners or local authorities.11
The chart below shows the trend in the number of caravans on private, public
and unauthorised sites since 1979. The number of caravans on private sites
has been growing continuously and surpassed the number on public sites in
2008. In January 2024, caravans on private sites made up 71% of caravans on
all authorised sites, compared to 32% in July 1983.
In July 1979, the number of caravans on unauthorised sites made up 57% of
all caravans on Traveller sites. In January 2024, it made up 14%.
1.4 Traveller sites provided by social housing
providers
Local authorities (LAs) and private registered providers of social housing
(PRPs) provide socially-rented Traveller sites (listed as ‘public’ sites in the
section above). Pitches on these sites may be permanent, residential pitches
or ‘transit’ pitches for short-term stays of up to three months.12
In July 2023, DLUHC recorded 282 sites operated by LAs and PRPs. There were
4,476 pitches available on these sites, of which 4,211 were residential pitches
11 DLUHC, Traveller caravan count: Table 4, last updated 5 June 2024 (accessed 1 August 2024)
12 A ‘pitch’ is an area of land on a Traveller site normally occupied by one family, sometimes referred
to as a plot. Pitches can vary in size.
Source: DLUHC, Traveller caravan count: Table 4, last updated 5 June 2024 (accessed 13 July 2024)
Note: Due to national lockdowns during the Covid-19 pandemic, the count of caravans on Gypsy and
Traveller sites was suspended in July 2020 and January 2021
Most caravans are on private Traveller sites
England, 1979 to 2024 (January count, in thousands)
0
3
6
9
12
15
1979 1983 1987 1991 1995 1999 2003 2007 2011 2015 2019 2023
Private sites
Public sites
Unauthorised sites
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
10 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
and 565 were transit pitches. In total across these pitches, there was capacity
for 7,233 caravans.13
The government does not publish data on the number of private pitches or
sites, only those provided by LAs or PRPs.
1.5 Site residents’ rights and responsibilities
In April 2011 the Coalition government extended the Mobile Homes Act 1983 to
local authority Traveller sites in England. This gave residents of these sites
greater protection against eviction and brought their rights and
responsibilities in line with those of residents of other residential mobile home
sites. The Mobile Homes Act 2013 further strengthened the protection offered
to mobile home owners on authorised sites in England.14
The Commons Library briefing on mobile (park) homes provides an overview
of the rights of residents who live year-round on mobile home parks.15
The charity Shelter provides information for Gypsies and Travellers living on
Traveller sites, including on how to apply to live on a site, help with costs,
how to complain about sites, what to do if threatened by eviction, and where
to get specialist advice and support.
13 DLUHC and MHCLG, Traveller caravan count: Table 4, last updated 5 June 2024 (accessed 1 August
2024)
14 Note: the protections do not apply to those staying on short-stay transit sites.
15 House of Commons Library briefing CBP01080: Mobile (park) homes
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
11 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
2 Assessing Gypsy and Traveller housing
needs
The periodical review of housing needs under section 8 of the Housing Act
1985 is a statutory requirement on local housing authorities.16 This requires
local authorities to assess and understand the accommodation needs of
people residing or resorting to their district. Local authorities should then
consider how to meet the accommodation needs identified in the assessment.
Section 124 of the Housing and Planning Act 2016 removed section 225 of the
Housing Act 2004, which required local authorities to carry out a specific
assessment of Gypsies and Traveller housing needs when completing their
housing needs assessments. Section 124 also amended section 8 of the
Housing Act 1985 to make it clear that the duty includes consideration of the
needs of people residing in, or resorting to the district for, caravan sites and
houseboat mooring sites.
In March 2016 the government published draft guidance to local authorities
on the periodical review of housing needs with respect to caravans and
houseboats. The guidance says authorities should assess the housing needs
of a variety of residents in differing circumstances, for example:
Caravan and houseboat dwelling households:
• who have no authorised site anywhere on which to reside;
• whose existing site accommodation is overcrowded or unsuitable, but
who are unable to obtain larger or more suitable accommodation;
• who contain suppressed households who are unable to set up separate
family units and
• who are unable to access a place on an authorised site, or obtain or
afford land to develop on.
Bricks and mortar dwelling households:
• Whose existing accommodation is overcrowded or unsuitable
(‘unsuitable’ in this context can include unsuitability by virtue of a
16 In this Act “local housing authority” means a district council, a London borough council, the
Common Council of the City of London, a Welsh county council or county borough council, or the
Council of the Isles of Scilly.
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
12 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
person’s cultural preference not to live in bricks-and-mortar
accommodation).
17
Once the accommodation needs assessment has been completed, local
authorities should consider how to meet the accommodation needs identified
in the assessment:
Needs can be met in a variety of ways, through the socially rented or
commercially rented sectors (be it for sites or bricks-and-mortar
accommodation), or through private ownership of sites or bricks-and-mortar
housing, moorings and houseboats. The assessment will provide the data on
which decisions about the appropriate mix of provision can be made.18
In February 2019, the Conservative government committed to finalising the
2016 draft guidance on assessing housing needs.19 To date the guidance has
not been finalised.
In 2016 the charity Friends, Families and Travellers (FFT), together with a
range of other interested parties, published best practice for assessing the
accommodation needs of Gypsies and Travellers.
2.1 Planning for traveller sites
The government’s planning policy for traveller sites requires local planning
authorities to assess the accommodation needs of Gypsy and Travellers in
their local area and, where there is a need for Traveller sites, identify land for
sites in their local plans. When plan making, local authorities should consider
how they can ensure that Gypsy and Traveller sites are sustainable
economically, socially and environmentally. The Commons Library briefing on
planning provisions for Gypsies and Travellers in England provides further
information.
17 MHCLG, Review of housing needs for caravans and houseboats: draft guidance, 11 March 2026, pp4-
5
18 As above, p7
19 MHCLG, Government response to the consultation on powers for dealing with unauthorised
development and encampments, February 2019, p36
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
13 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
3 Accommodation challenges facing
Gypsies and Travellers
A shortage of suitable, secure accommodation contributes to many of the
inequalities that Gypsy and Traveller communities experience,20 and can be a
source of tension between travelling and settled communities.
3.1 Access to Traveller sites and housing
A shortage of suitable, authorised Traveller sites is often cited as a key reason
for Gypsy and Traveller households moving into conventional bricks-andmortar accommodation. However, some households may decide to give up a
mobile lifestyle (temporarily or permanently) for other reasons, for example
because of support needs relating to health or education.21
A 2022 research project on the lived experiences of Gypsy and Traveller
communities in England and Wales, commissioned by the Office for National
Statistics, found for some Gypsy and Travellers, living on the roadside was
seen as a necessity rather than a choice. Families described staying in laybys, car parks or transit sites (designed for temporary stays), sometimes for
several years at a time, because of an inability to access space on a
permanent Traveller site.22
An investigation by the charity Friends, Families and Travellers in 2021 (PDF)
identified that there were:
• only 59 available permanent pitches on local authority and registered
social provider Traveller sites in total in England, and
• at least 1,696 households on waiting lists for pitches on local authority
and registered social provider Traveller sites in England.23
20 For further information on inequalities see: the series of briefings on the Commons Library website
page on Gypsies and Travellers; and House of Commons Women and Equalities Committee,
Tackling inequalities faced by Gypsy, Roma and Traveller communities, HC 360 2017–19, 5 April 2019 21 See: Equality and Human Rights Commission, Inequalities experienced by gypsy and traveller
communities, S Cemlyn et al, 2 February 2009, p19; and ONS, Gypsies’ and Travellers’ lived
experiences, homes, England and Wales: 2022, 7 December 2022, sections 2 and 4
22 ONS, Gypsies’ and Travellers’ lived experiences, homes, England and Wales: 2022, 7 December 2022,
section 8
23 Friends, Families and Travellers, Last on the list: An overview of unmet need for pitches on Traveller
sites in England (PDF), January 2021
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
14 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
Although most Gypsies and Travellers now live in settled accommodation,
they can experience difficulties in accessing suitable housing and sustaining
tenancies. The charity Shelter’s good practice briefing on Gypsies and
Travellers provides an overview of some of these difficulties, including:
• discrimination
• distrust of public authorities
• low levels of literacy
• isolation from family support networks
• neighbourhood tensions24
In 2009, the Equality and Human Rights Commission published an evidence
review of the inequalities experienced by Gypsies and Travellers. This
identified that “ …although there is little published research into the
experiences of housed families and individuals, the wealth of anecdotal data
on experiences of racism, discrimination and poor health outcomes
associated with residence in housing, is compelling...25
Following an inquiry into the inequalities faced by Gypsy and Traveller
communities, the then Chair of the House of Commons Women and Equalities
Select Committee, Maria Miller, highlighted the committee’s concern that
although the majority of Gypsies and Travellers live in settled
accommodation, “Government policy making is overwhelmingly focused on
planning and encampments, and that these eclipse a wide range of other
important issues around policy and service provision.”26
3.2 Living conditions on Traveller sites
Several studies have raised concerns about the living conditions on some
Traveller sites, including:
• poor location of sites (for example, isolated, under motorways, next to
sewage works or on poor quality land)
• health hazards (such as contamination by vermin)
• decayed sewage and water fittings
• poor-quality utility rooms
24 Shelter, Good Practice Briefing: Gypsies and Travellers, February 2007
25 Equality and Human Rights Commission, Inequalities experienced by Gypsy and Traveller
communities, S Cemlyn et al, 2 February 2009
26 Women and Equalities Committee, Gypsy Roma and Traveller communities 'comprehensively failed'
by policy makers, 5 April 2019
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
15 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
• failings in fire safety27
A research report published by the National Inclusion Health Board (NIHB) in
January 2016 on the impact of insecure accommodation and the living
environment on Gypsies’ and Travellers’ health also highlighted concerns
about poor living environments on some Traveller sites and their negative
impact on health outcomes. The report made a number of recommendations
intended to improve living conditions and called for a coordinated response
across local and national government.28
De Montfort University and the Joseph Rowntree Foundation conducted a
research study of site management and delivery for Gypsies and Travellers in
England between September 2014 and July 2016. The study, published by the
Chartered Institute of Housing, found a “range in quality and style of social
site management”. The research report, Managing and delivering Gypsy and
Traveller sites: negotiating conflict, provides guidance on the key factors for
effective site management, together with examples of good practice.29
The House of Commons Women and Equalities Committee inquiry into
tackling inequalities faced by Gypsy, Roma and Traveller communities in 2019
highlighted significant concerns about the quality of some sites and
recommended that local authorities should act to improve standards:
Local authorities should inspect every existing private Traveller site in their
area to map which have access to a minimum standard of basic amenities and
which do not. For those that do not, local authorities should place conditions
upon the license to ensure that these measures are put in place or consider
revoking licenses that do not comply with these conditions. This solution does
not address the problem that arises when it is the local authority itself that
owns the site. For this, we recommend that the Ministry of Housing,
Communities and Local Government explore methods by which local
authorities can be held to account for their own sites.30
The government’s response to the committee report said local authorities
should already carry out appropriate inspections of licenced residential
mobile homes sites in accordance with their local enforcement policy.31 Local
authorities can prosecute site operators who do not comply when issued with
a compliance notice and, if necessary, can take emergency action by carrying
27 See: Equality and Human Rights Commission, Inequalities experienced by Gypsy and Traveller
communities, S Cemlyn et al, 2 February 2009, p9
28 Department of Health National Inclusion Health Board, Impact of insecure accommodation and the
living environment on Gypsies’ and Travellers’ health, 8 January 2016 29 Chartered Institute of Housing, Managing and delivering Gypsy and Traveller sites: negotiating
conflict, De Montfort University and Joseph Rowntree Foundation, December 2016 30 House of Commons Women and Equalities Committee, Tackling inequalities faced by Gypsy, Roma
and Traveller communities, HC 360 2017–19, 5 April 2019, para 111
31 Privately run Traveller sites with appropriate planning permission are subject to the local authority
site licencing regime under the Caravan Sites and Control of Development Act 1960. Local
authorities have discretion to attach conditions to a licence and can issue a compliance notice for a
breach of a condition. The Government has published guidance: Mobile Homes Act 2013 A Best
Practice Guide for Local Authorities on Enforcement of the New Site Licensing Regime (2015).
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
16 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
out works and recovering expenses.
32 Nevertheless, the government
recognised that poor quality accommodation was an issue and said this
would be addressed as part of its wider strategy to address the inequalities
faced by Gypsy, Roma and Traveller communities.33
Research in 2022 by the Office for National Statistics on the lived experiences
of Gypsies and Travellers found the accommodation needs and preferences of
Gypsy and Traveller participants varied. However, a common priority was
wanting to live somewhere they felt safe, with access to basic amenities such
as electricity, water and showers, and where they could live near to family
and friends. Some appeared to live in circumstances such as this, while others
described a range of issues with the standards and management of sites,
overcrowding, a sense of being unsafe and few positive relationships with
others around them, with potentially detrimental impacts on their physical
and mental well-being.34
The National Policy Advisory Panel on Gypsy and Traveller Housing published
a short guide to providing and managing sites for Gypsies and Travellers
(PDF) in January 2021. The guidance shares some key lessons and examples
intended to prompt more housing associations and local authorities to get
involved in providing good quality sites for Gypsies and Travellers.
Government funding to improve Traveller site quality
Capital funding is available through the Affordable Homes Programme 2021
to 2026 for new Traveller pitches or sites, but not for improving standards of
accommodation on existing sites. In January 2024, the government reported
that 23 new Traveller pitches had been delivered through the Affordable
Homes Programme 2021 to 26.
35
On 20 March 2022 the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and
Communities36 announced £10 million of capital funding for 2022/23 to
support local authorities in building new Traveller sites and refurbishing
existing sites.37 On 15 June 2023, the government announced that funding had
been awarded to nine local authorities and 16 projects across England.
38 The
majority of the £10m funding was awarded to refurbishment projects to help
improve living conditions for site residents.
39
32 House of Commons Women and Equalities Committee, Tackling inequalities faced by Gypsy, Roma
and Traveller communities: Government and Ofsted response to the Committee’s Seventh Report of
Session 2017–19, HC 2411, 2 July 2019, paras 68-73 33 As above, para 17. Note: The 2019 UK Government committed to develop a cross-government
strategy to tackle the inequalities faced by Gypsy, Roma and Traveller communities.
34 ONS, Gypsies’ and Travellers’ lived experiences, homes, England and Wales: 2022, 7 December 2022,
sections 2 and 3 35 PQ HL1616 [on Affordable Housing: Finance], 25 January 2024
36 Now called the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government.
37 DLUHC, £10 million for traveller sites across England will improve life chances and reduce
unauthorised encampments, 20 March 2022
38 DLUHC, Councils supported with £10 million to improve traveller sites, 15 June 2023
39 DLUHC, Traveller Site Fund 2022/23, last updated 15 June 2023
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
17 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
3.3 Homelessness
It is widely acknowledged that there is a national shortage of suitable
permanent and transit Traveller sites.40 Gypsies and Travellers with no access
to a Traveller site may meet the statutory definition of homeless (see below).
The DLUHC statutory homelessness statistics record that 810 households,
where the ethnicity of the main applicant was given as Gypsy or Irish
Traveller, were owed a homelessness prevention or relief duty by local
authorities in 2022/23.
41 However, this may not be an accurate reflection of
homelessness in the travelling community; the barriers Gypsies and Travellers
face in accessing public services are well documented.42
Under the Homelessness Act 2002, local authorities must have a
homelessness strategy, which must be renewed at least every five years. The
statutory homelessness code of guidance for local authorities in England
reminds authorities that “…when drawing up their homelessness strategies
for preventing and reducing homelessness, they must consider the needs of
all groups of people in their district who are homeless or likely to become
homeless, including Gypsies and Travellers.”43
Part 7 of the Housing Act 1996 (as amended) provides the statutory underpinning for action to tackle homelessness. Local authorities have a duty
under the legislation to secure accommodation for households that are
homeless and defined as being in a ‘priority need’ category,44 unintentionally
homeless and eligible for assistance. The Homelessness Reduction Act 2017
placed new duties on local authorities to intervene at earlier stages to
prevent homelessness in their areas. It also requires authorities to provide
40 See for example: Chartered Institute of Housing, Managing and delivering Gypsy and Traveller sites:
negotiating conflict, De Montfort University and Joseph Rowntree Foundation, December 2016;
Friends, Families and Travellers (FFT), Last on the list: An overview of unmet need for pitches on
Traveller sites in England (PDF), January 2021; and FFT, Kicking the can down the road: The planning
and provision of Gypsy and Traveller sites in England 1960-2023, Dr Simon Ruston MRTPI, November
2023 41 DLUHC, Live tables on statutory homelessness, Table A8 (30 April 2024). Where an application for
homelessness assistance is made, local authorities have a duty to take reasonable steps to help
prevent any eligible person who is threatened with homelessness from becoming homeless. If the
applicant is already homeless, or becomes homeless despite activity during the prevention stage,
the local authority has a ‘relief duty’ to take reasonable steps to help the applicant to secure
accommodation. For further information on the statuary framework see Commons Library briefing
CBP01164: Statutory Homelessness in England.
42 See, for example,: House of Commons Women and Equalities Committee, Tackling inequalities
faced by Gypsy, Roma and Traveller communities, HC 360 2017–19, 5 April 2019.
43 DLUHC, Homelessness code of guidance for local authorities, last updated 3 May 2024, para 2.16
44 For further information see: Shelter, Who has a priority need when applying as homeless, last
updated 14 February 2023
Gypsies and Travellers: Accommodation in England
18 Commons Library Research Briefing, 1 August 2024
homelessness services to all those affected, not just those who have ‘priority
need’.45
Under the homelessness legislation, a person applying to their local authority
for assistance will be deemed to be homeless if the accommodation available
for their occupation is a caravan and they do not have a place where they are
entitled, or permitted, to put it and live in it.
If a duty to secure accommodation arises in such cases, the local authority is
not required to make equivalent accommodation available (or provide a site
for the applicant’s own accommodation). However, the authority must
consider whether such options are reasonably available, particularly where
this would provide the most suitable solution to the applicant’s
accommodation needs.46
The statutory homelessness code of guidance for local authorities requires
authorities to consider the needs and lifestyle of applicants who are Gypsies
and Travellers when carrying out their homelessness duties:
…Where a duty to secure accommodation arises but an appropriate site is not
immediately available, the housing authority may need to provide an
alternative temporary solution until a suitable site, or some other suitable
option, becomes available. Some Gypsies and Travellers may have a cultural
aversion to the prospect of ‘bricks and mortar’ accommodation. In such cases,
the housing authority should seek to provide an alternative solution. However,
where the housing authority is satisfied that there is no prospect of a suitable
site for the time being, there may be no alternative solution. Housing
authorities must give consideration to the needs and lifestyle of applicants
who are Gypsies and Travellers when considering their application and how
best to discharge a duty to secure suitable accommodation, in line with their
obligations to act consistently with the Human Rights Act 1998, and in
particular the right to respect for private life, family and the home; as well as
their duties under section 149 of the Equality Act 2010.
47
The charity Shelter provides further information on homeless help for Gypsy,
Roma and Traveller communities.
45 For further information see: Commons Library briefing CBP01164: Statutory Homelessness in
England
46 DLUHC, Homelessness code of guidance for local authorities, last updated 3 May 2024, para 16.43
47 As above, para 16.44
The House of Commons Library is a research and
information service based in the UK Parliament.
Our impartial analysis, statistical research and
resources help MPs and their staff scrutinise
legislation, develop policy, and support constituents.
Our published material is available to everyone
on commonslibrary.parliament.uk.
Get our latest research delivered straight to your inbox.
Subscribe at commonslibrary.parliament.uk/subscribe
or scan the code below:
commonslibrary.parliament.uk
@commonslibrary
